Trump’s march back to power has faltered. Now comes the real challenge for the global left

“It could have been a lot worse” will never be the most inspiring
verdict on any election result, especially in a political and media
environment that insists on absolutist conclusions and disparages
nuance. In the case of the US midterms, however, it is the wisest one.

American democracy is flawed and under threat. But an overlooked virtue
of well-rooted democratic political systems, not just the US version, is
that they rarely produce catastrophes, even if sometimes they can come
close. The midterms were just such a non-catastrophe.

Don’t get this wrong. For the Republicans to win control of the House,
particularly in the aftermath of what happened in the US Capitol on 6
January last year, is a genuinely serious development. If Republicans
eventually win back control of the Senate as well, it will be even more
serious.

Either way, it will have direct consequences for Joe Biden’s legislative
agenda. It will be felt in Ukraine, as weapons procurement programmes
intended for Kyiv become stalled. And it will strengthen the numbers of
legislators on Capitol Hill who believe, or who say in public they
believe, that Biden stole the 2020 election from Donald Trump.

Election deniers in the Republican party won a lot of races this week.
Their success in winning party nominations and then getting elected to
Washington is an indication that much of the party remains the willing
hostage of Trump and his Maga movement. But the midterms suggest that
this will not be good news for Republican chances in 2024, especially if
Trump is the presidential nominee.

The nightmare fatalism that seemed to have overwhelmed many moderate and
liberal observers about Trump’s return in the final days of the campaign
was palpable. Yet it proved significantly misplaced. There wasn’t a
landslide. And there isn’t – yet, at least – a tide carrying Trump back
towards the White House either.

If anything, these elections suggest election denial and the
score-settling Trump agenda have become a drag on the party’s wider
electoral chances. That’s now part of the reality of the next two years
too. If, as expected, Trump declares next week that he is running in
2024, they will become an even bigger part.

Ordinarily this might help his likely chief rival, Ron DeSantis. But
Trump has the power to actively wound his party too. He is threatening
to go to war with DeSantis if he runs. The internal conflict between
them will also affect the larger electoral dynamic, possibly helping
Biden or whoever runs next time.

The deeper dive into how and why things have turned out this way can
only come once all of the midterm contests are concluded – which will
not be until December. Nevertheless, the Democratic vote has held up
rather better than many expected, perhaps because of the supreme court’s
abortion agenda, perhaps because Biden’s economic interventions have
helped, and surely also because the Trump threat was a mobilising
factor.

As a result, prominent election deniers such as Doug Mastriano, the
Republican candidate for state governor in the important swing state of
Pennsylvania, were very badly beaten. Candidate quality was also an
issue, notably in Georgia, another swing state these days. But voter
reluctance over Trump could again be a crucial factor in 2024.

Given that midterm elections are always a referendum on the incumbent
president, and that Biden’s percentage approval ratings remain in the
low 40s, these were always going to be tough contests. Given also that
these are unfamiliarly tough economic times for middle America, with
inflation (currently around 8% in the US, a 40-year high) seen as the
most important issue by most voters, it would have been genuinely
striking for the Democrats to buck the historic trend and hold on or
even make gains. Unsurprisingly, that didn’t happen.

This should be a warning to the Democrats, as well as a temporary
relief. If the Democrats were able to limit their losses this time
because disapproval of Trump outweighed dissatisfaction with Biden, it
may follow that Biden was simply lucky in the way many voters framed the
choice at the polls. A fresh candidate such as DeSantis would pose a
different and conceivably more effective challenge.

All of this underlines why those who watch the US from this side of the
Atlantic should be careful too. It is always a mistake to oversimplify
in politics. The midterms do not show that the country is hurtling
towards a second Trump presidency. But they do not show that it is
turning its back on Trump either.

This uncertainty is a continuing problem for the whole world. It is
certainly one for America’s western allies, since there is no way of
predicting how the next two years will play out. In the long run no
issue matters more in this context than the climate crisis. In the
shorter run, the number one issue at stake is Ukraine.

These two years may decide the outcome of the Ukraine war. So it matters
to all European nations that the Biden administration will remain Kyiv’s
principal ally, supplying the weapons and knowhow to keep Ukraine armed.
Nevertheless, the approaching 2024 contest will cast a shadow. Democrats
will not want an election with an unfinished war. Republicans could
pledge to turn off the spending tap for Ukraine.

The dilemmas facing Britain over all this are intense and immediate. For
post-Brexit Britain, the US looms large as key ally and partner. Boris
Johnson’s integrated review in 2021 of post-Brexit foreign and security
policy imagined the US as the guarantor and enhancer of Britain’s roving
role in the world. That was fanciful even before Ukraine and before talk
of a Trump return grew louder. Now it is even more uncertain.

Rishi Sunak, an instinctive Atlanticist, is learning foreign policy on
the job. He cannot make airy assumptions about the US. He should make a
priority of toning down the post-Brexit rhetoric about Britain’s role.
He needs to recognise that a second Trump administration would be a
minefield for Britain, and that he must prioritise a more practical
approach to Europe.

The same also applies to Labour’s response. As the 2024 US election
approaches, so will Britain’s own. The inescapable foreign policy
challenges facing Keir Starmer will in some ways be easier to navigate
than they will for Sunak, since Starmer is more naturally in favour of
good relations with Europe. But he will not want the British general
election to be fought on that issue, so he may back away from it.

The temptation, for Britain and other European nations, after the 2022
midterms is to allow modest relief at the outcome to stop us thinking
strategically and in more self-reliant ways about how to respond to the
new and profoundly uncertain United States that is evolving across the
Atlantic. In an era dominated by the urgency of the climate crisis and
the Ukraine war, that would be a foolish choice.
